Converting sub-volumes to/from other file formats (chunk2stack) (#97)
HEFTIEProject/heftie-textbook: book/6-export.md

---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Exporting

+++

> In this chapter we'll look at how to convert sub-volumes of 3D zarr images to other file formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter we'll look at how to convert sub-volumes of 3D Zarr images to other file formats.
```
Need to be consistent with Zarr capitalisation throughout.

## Converting Zarr sub-volumes to tiff

To begin this chapter, we'll look at how to convert Zarr sub-volumes to tiff.

To start with we'll load our heart sample dataset, as a zarr array and then extract a smaller volume as a NumPy array.

Note: the heart sample dataset is only 200MB, so the entire dataset could be extracted into a NumPy array (and therefore loaded into memory) if required.
If you are working with larger datasets, you will need to keep the extracted volume small enough to fit into memory, or extract it as a series of smaller chunks.
If you are using an in-memory Zarr store, then the entire dataset will be loaded into memory regardless of the size of the sub-volume you extract.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from pathlib import Path
import zarr
import numpy as np

from data_helpers import load_heart_data, plot_slice
zarr_array = load_heart_data(array_type='zarr')
original_array = zarr_array[:, :, :].copy()  # Copy with original data

> changed_array = zarr_array[:, :, :].copy()  # Copy for processed data

Reviewer: Why do you need the `.copy()` calls here? Does indexing the Zarr array not return a copy anyway?

start_idx = 40
end_idx = 50
slice_range = slice(start_idx, end_idx)
np_array = zarr_array[slice_range, slice_range, slice_range]
n_bytes = np_array.nbytes  
n_gb = n_bytes / (10**9)

> # Print store information to show data is not loaded into memory

Reviewer: This is slightly the wrong way round logically - first you should load the Zarr array, then print the store and use the result to explain (in text, not a code block) that the Zarr array has not been loaded into memory.

Then, in a new code block, you should exctract a sub-set of the Zarr array, not read it all in, and explain the concept that you can read a sub-set of the array into memory without reading the whole array into memory at once.

print(f"Zarr array store: {zarr_array.store}")
print(f"Zarr array shape: {zarr_array.shape}")
print(f"Zarr array dtype: {zarr_array.dtype}")
print(f"Zarr array chunks: {zarr_array.chunks}")
print(f"Sub-volume size: {n_gb:.3f} GB")
print(f"Only the requested slice is loaded into memory as a NumPy array")
```

> The next step is to write this NumPy array to a tiff file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step is to write this NumPy array to a TIFF file.
```

TIFF is an acronym, so capitalised. This needs fixing elsewhere too.

We'll use the `imageio` library to do this.

Processing of the sub-volume can be done using any tool that can read and write tiff files.
For example, you could use `Fiji`.

The `imageio` library is used to then read the tiff file back into a NumPy array.
This subvolume array can then be copied back in place to the original Zarr array.

```{code-cell} ipython3
import imageio.v3 as iio
# iio.imwrite("image_file.tiff", np_array, plugin='tifffile')

> zarr_small = np_array

Reviewer: At this point you should break the code cell and put in some actual text explaining that one can now do some processing on the iamge using another tool. Then explain instead of that, for the purposes of the tutorial you'll fake some processing happening on the data.

# Do some processing with another tool / software here e.g. Fiji
sub_array = zarr.zeros_like(zarr_small)

# Then load the result:
# sub_array = iio.imread("image_file.tiff", plugin='tifffile')

> original_array[40:50, 40:50, 40:50]=zarr_small # Insert non-processed data

Reviewer: Please could you format the cells with ruff? See https://github.com/leotaku/jupyter-ruff for instructions.

Author: `doccmd --language=python --command="ruff check" 6-export.md` I've run this command and there's no error message or any message suggesting changes to the code. `jupyter-ruff` seems to only work if the file is `.ipynb` from what I could see.

Author: Had to convert to .ipynb using [jupytext](https://github.com/mwouts/jupytext#command-line-conversion), then use jupyter-ruff to format the full document and finally convert back to .md using jupytext where the only further modification needed was replacing ```python with ```{code-cell} ipython3

changed_array[slice_range, slice_range, slice_range] = sub_array  # Insert processed data

```

> To compare the original and processed sub-volumes being inserted back into the image, we can visualize them side by side using `matplotlib`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, lets compare the original image and the processed image after the sub-volume has been re-inserted:
```
Don't need to explain you're using Matplotlib (that's an implementation detail 😄 )

```{code-cell} ipython3
from data_helpers import plot_slice

> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I don't think you need this import?

plot_slice(original_array, z_idx=45)
plot_slice(changed_array, z_idx=45)
```

+++

## Conversion Format Comparison

> The following table summarizes the different file formats for converting Zarr sub-volumes, their associated tools, and trade-offs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table summarizes some other commonly used filed formats that have Python tools available for saving NumPy arrays to:
```

|--------|--------------|------------|---------------|---------------------|
| **TIFF** | [imageio](https://imageio.readthedocs.io/) | • Widely supported<br>• Preserves bit depth<br>• Good for microscopy workflows<br>• Fast read/write | • Limited metadata support<br>• Large file sizes<br>• No compression by default | Napari, ImageJ, Fiji |
| **NIfTI** | [nibabel](https://nipy.org/nibabel/) | • Medical imaging standard<br>• Rich metadata (orientation, spacing)<br>• Good compression<br>• ITK-SNAP, FSL, AFNI support | • Medical imaging specific<br>• Limited to certain data types<br>• Complex coordinate systems | ITK-SNAP, FSL, AFNI |
| **DICOM** | [pydicom](https://pydicom.github.io/) | • Clinical standard<br>• Extensive metadata<br>• Patient/study information<br>• Universal medical viewer support | • Complex format<br>• Large overhead<br>• Requires many mandatory fields<br>• Slow for large volumes | OsiriX, RadiAnt, Horos |
| **NumPy** | [numpy](https://numpy.org/) | • Direct array format<br>• Fast loading<br>• Preserves exact data<br>• Python native | • No metadata<br>• Large file sizes<br>• Python ecosystem only | None (Python only) |

> ### Recommended Use Cases

Reviewer: Why not put these in the table instead of in a separate list?

- **TIFF**: General imaging workflows, microscopy data, when broad tool compatibility is needed
- **NIfTI**: Medical imaging analysis, neuroimaging studies, when spatial metadata is critical
- **DICOM**: Clinical workflows, when patient metadata is required, for regulatory compliance
- **NumPy**: Quick prototyping, Python-only workflows, temporary data exchange

Both the NIfTI and DICOM sub-volumes can be viewed in open-source viewers such as `ITK-SNAP` (see [ITK-SNAP site](https://www.itksnap.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php)).

Note: This process is more complex for OME-Zarr images that have a series of different resolution levels.

> When writing the processed sub-volume back to the OME-Zarr image, you will need to ensure that the resolution levels are updated correctly.

Reviewer: this warning should go right up near the top of the chapter, so readers understand up front this is only applicable to Zarr

import datetime

# Example 2D data (DICOM is usually 2D per file)
data = np_array[:,:, 0]  # Take the first slice for demonstration

# Create metadata
file_meta = pydicom.Dataset()
ds = FileDataset("output.dcm", {}, file_meta=file_meta, preamble=b"\0" * 128)

# Set required values
ds.PatientName = "Test^Patient"
ds.PatientID = "123456"
ds.Modality = "OT"
ds.StudyInstanceUID = "1.2.3"
ds.SeriesInstanceUID = "1.2.3.1"
ds.SOPInstanceUID = "1.2.3.1.1"
ds.SOPClassUID = pydicom.uid.SecondaryCaptureImageStorage
ds.file_meta.TransferSyntaxUID = pydicom.uid.ExplicitVRLittleEndian

# Set image data
ds.Rows, ds.Columns = data.shape
ds.PhotometricInterpretation = "MONOCHROME2"
ds.SamplesPerPixel = 1
ds.BitsAllocated = 16
ds.BitsStored = 16
ds.HighBit = 15
ds.PixelRepresentation = 0
ds.PixelData = data.tobytes()

# Save to file
ds.save_as("output.dcm")
```

After processing the sub-volume, we can then read it back in as a DICOM image to get the image data as a NumPy array
and copy it back in place to the original Zarr array.

```{code-cell} ipython3

# Load the DICOM file
ds = pydicom.dcmread('output.dcm')

# Extract the pixel data as a NumPy array
data = ds.pixel_array
```

> Both the NIfTI and DICOM sub-volumes can be viewed in open-source viewers such as `ITK-SNAP` (see [ITK-SNAP site](https://www.itksnap.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php)).

Reviewer 2: Perhaps mention somewhere that this process is more complex for ome-zarr images that have a series of different resolution levels? When writing the processed image back, you would need to update all resolution levels appropriately, rather than only a single array.

---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

> # Converting sub-volumes to/from other file formats

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Exporting
```

+++

> In this chapter we'll look at how to convert sub-volumes of 3D zarr images to and from other file formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter we'll look at how to convert sub-volumes of 3D zarr images to other file formats.
```

The use case for this is allow users to extract sub-volumes of large 3D images into a preferred file format,
perform some analysis/processing on the sub-volume using their preferred tools and then
copy the results back in-place to the original zarr image.

> Note: this chapter (and the whole of the textbook) uses Zarr version 2 and OME-Zarr version 0.4. Although newer versions exist (Zarr version 3 and OME-Zarr version 0.5), software tools have not quite caught up to support the newer versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I don't think this needs to be repeated from the start of the textbook?

```{code-cell} ipython3
import napari

import nibabel as nib
import pydicom
from pydicom.dataset import Dataset, FileDataset
import datetime
```

## Converting Zarr sub-volumes to tiff

To begin this chapter, we'll look at how to convert Zarr sub-volumes to tiff.

To start with we'll load our heart sample dataset, as a zarr array
and then extract a smaller volume as a NumPy array.

Note: the heart sample dataset is only 200MB,
so the entire dataset could be extracted into a NumPy array (and therefore loaded into memory) if required.

> If you are working with larger datasets, you will need to keep the extracted volume small enough to fit into memory, or extract it as a series of smaller chunks.

Reviewer: This is only true if your Zarr data store is not in-memory, so I think it's worth mentioning that here.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from pathlib import Path
import zarr
import numpy as np

data_path: data_path = (Path(__file__).parent / "data" / "hoa_heart.zarr").resolve()

> zarr_array = zarr.open_array(data_path)

Reviewer: There's now a helper function to get the sample data directly as a Zarr array.

> np_array = zarr_array[100:200, 100:200, 100:200]

Reviewer: At this point, you should print the store to make the point that the data is not all loaded into memory.

> np_array = zarr_array[100:200, 100:200, 100:200]

Reviewer: Because you re-use the same slice later, it would be nice to save the slice as a variable (something like `slc = [slice(100, 200), slice(100, 200), slice(100, 200)]; np_array = zarr_array[slc]`)

n_bytes = 100*100*100*zarr_array.dtype.itemsize  

> n_gb = n_bytes / (10**9)

Reviewer: What's the point of these two lines? Nothing is printed or explained.

If you want to get the number of bytes stored in the numpy array, I *think* there's a `.nbytes` property.

```

The next step is to write this NumPy array to a tiff file.
We'll use the `imageio` library to do this.

Processing of the sub-volume can be done using any tool
that can read and write tiff files.

> For example, you could use `Napari`.

Reviewer: This is a bad example, because Napari also supports Zarr 😄. Would be good to come up with a use case here that supports working with TIFF but not with Zarr.

The `imageio` library is used to then read the

> tiff file back into a NumPy array.

Reviewer: To make revising text easier, can you rework this to stick to one sentence per line.

This subvolume array can then be copied back
in place to the original Zarr array.

> ```{code-cell} ipython3

Reviewer: These code cells should be formatted with `ruff` - see https://github.com/leotaku/jupyter-ruff and https://github.com/HEFTIEProject/heftie-textbook/issues/101

import imageio.v3 as iio
iio.imwrite("image_file.tiff", np_array, plugin='tifffile')

# Do some processing with another tool / software here...
# Then load the result:

> zarr_small=iio.imread("image_file.tiff", plugin='tifffile')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sub_array = iio.imread("image_file.tiff", plugin='tifffile')
```
I think this is a better variable name - you're not loading directly into a Zarr array.

> zarr_small=iio.imread("image_file.tiff", plugin='tifffile')

Reviewer: Once you've read it in, can you perform a simple operation on the sub-volume to process it, just to make the point that only the sub-volume has been processed? Then when the array is shown later there will be an obvious difference in the sub-volume that was 'proccessed'

zarr_array[100:200, 100:200, 100:200]=zarr_small

```

To view the results, we can use the `napari` viewer
to display the Zarr array including the newly written sub-volume.

```{code-cell} ipython3
viewer = napari.Viewer()
new_layer = viewer.add_image(zarr_array)
napari.run()
```

> 

Reviewer: Here I think the main concepts and examples have been introduced - all that differs for other file formats is how you save and load them. So at this point there should be a final paragraph.

+++

> ## Converting Zarr sub-volumes to NIfTI/DICOM

Reviewer: Given the concept of saving/loading is the same (export to numpy array, save numpy array, process, load numpy array, insert into Zarr array), I'm not sure if there's much benefit in extended examples after here. Perhaps what would be nice is a reference table that links to examples in other libraries that show how to save/load numpy data. That way we don't duplicate example material here, and it saves us effort if we want to point to other data formats.
